Simple open payments guide (#59)
interledger/interledger.org-developers: src/content/blog/2024-06-20-simple-open-payments-guide.md

- What is the best underlying method to use for the transaction?

With the Open Payments standard, applications do not need to be registered financial service providers (FSPs) to facilitate transactions. Instead of moving or holding money, applications send payment obligations. This means they are not transferring money directly but are sending instructions to your financial institution to transfer the funds on your behalf. This setup eliminates the need for the application to be a financial service provider itself, even though it has direct communication access to your account. This is beneficial for applications because they don’t need to contend with the legal and compliance hurdles required to be a financial services provider. But it’s also advantageous for you because you don't need to share sensitive information with online applications. Applications storing information like credit card numbers and CVV codes always pose a risk of data leaks or hacking, even with the best intentions.

You might think, this sounds convenient, but is it secure? I don’t want just anyone pulling money out of my account!

## You Remain in Control

> With the Open Payments standard, you remain in full control of your financial transactions. When an application uses Open Payments, it securely shares key information about itself with the financial institutions it interacts with. This verification ensures that the account provider knows the application is legitimate when making a payment request on your behalf.

Reviewer: "it securely shares key information about itself"
Are you referring to the cryptographic key or _key information_ as in _very important information_?

Either way, I think we should mention that it is cryptographically secure.

Another scenario arises when the sender's and recipient's account providers are not directly connected by a shared settlement layer. In such cases, as long as there are one or more intermediaries that share a common settlement system with each institution, settlement can still occur via these intermediaries. For instance, if my bank deals in Dollars and cannot settle directly with your cryptocurrency wallet, there might be a digital wallet intermediary capable of settling between fiat and cryptocurrency. Thus, a shared settlement layer exists indirectly through intermediaries. The goal of the Interledger Protocol is to navigate the network of financial institutions and settlement systems to find the most efficient and cost-effective settlement paths. By leveraging these interconnected networks, Interledger aims to minimize costs and enhance reliability.

## What's Happening in the Open Payments Space Today?

<!-- TODO:  -->

- INCOMPLETE: Is there anyone in the wild using OP now?

Currently, the adoption of the Open Payments standard is still in progress. Some innovative institutions and services have begun to integrate this standard, but widespread use is still developing.

> [GateHub](https://gatehub.net/) is a digital wallet provider working with the Open Payments standard globally. They are able to facilitate some cross-currency transactions, although regulatory limitations may apply depending on the user's country of residence. The [Fynbos Wallet](https://wallet.fynbos.app) is another example. They are operational in America, Europe, and South Africa. However, transactions are currently limited to other Fynbos users within the same region due to regulatory and technical constraints. There are plans underway to create payment channels between Fybos and GateHub users in Europe.

Reviewer: "There are plans underway to create payment channels between Fybos and GateHub users in Europe."

I think not just Europe but all Gatehub to all Fynbos users. But they may start with Europe.

Author: This is how Adrian phrased it to me. Since this is an OP intro I'm hesitant to sidetrack too much on making this a progress report and map of future developments.

We could try, "There are plans underway to create payment channels between Fybos and GateHub users." and just leave it there, or, "Plans are underway to create payment channels between Fynbos and GateHub users, beginning with Europe."

## TLDR

Standardization enhances interoperability by reducing the development effort required for each integration. This alone brings down costs while providing a scalable and efficient solution for handling digital payments. When interoperability is easy, there is no need for unnecessary middlemen and the fees they add to the cost of transactions.

With Open Payments, users are empowered to give applications direct access to their accounts, deciding who can access their money, how much, and how often. Users only share public information (in the form of wallet addresses) with applications when making payments, keeping their sensitive financial data private.

> Applications can handle payments without needing to be registered financial service providers or navigating the risks involved in handling sensitive information like credit card numbers.

Reviewer: Should we move that to the top to be an actual TLDR?

Author: What if we change the name to "Key Takeaways" instead. 

My reluctance with moving it to the top is that I want to create a gentle path through the post that encourages an incremental introduction to the concepts. I worry it's kind off putting to put the summary at the top. People who are less technical might feel like this article is pitched over their heads. But by the time they reach the bottom they should understand all of this and it just re-captures the main points to give a simple summary of what OP is.

What do you think?

---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogLayout.astro
title: "A Simple Guide to the Open Payments Standard"
description: Learn how the Open Payments standard makes online payments easier and more accessible for everyone.
date: 2024-06-20
slug: simple-open-payments-guide
author: Sarah Jones
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/sarah-jones-ba6bb6b9
tags:
  - Interledger
  - Open Payments
---

## The Current Digital Payments Landscape

Handling payments is a crucial part of many online applications. Whether you’re running an eCommerce site selling products, a fundraising platform accepting donations, a streaming service charging for content, or a subscription service requiring monthly fees, digital payments are at the core of the operation.

> Many application developers rely on third-party payment gateways to handle these transactions. Companies like PayPal, Stripe, and Square offer services to process credit card payments on behalf of the application. In return for these services, applications incur various fees, which can include monthly fees, flat rates per transaction, or a percentage of the transaction amounts. This approach, while convenient, introduces additional expenses and makes the application reliant on a third-party provider. This reliance can limit control over the user experience, such as forcing users to trust third-party providers with sensitive information like credit card details.

Reviewer 2: ![third-party](https://github.com/interledger/interledger.org-developers/assets/1461498/c7322d29-8cf4-417a-9659-ebbee3d414a0)

Maybe we could label the third-party provider blob with all the various fees as well.

Reviewer 3: to be more explicit, maybe we say "credit card _network_" in the diagram

An alternative is for applications to integrate directly with their bank's payment processing services. This method can offer lower transaction fees and increase control over the payment process. However, it requires significant development effort and is not always possible. Additionally, switching to a different bank becomes very challenging due to the extensive integration work that was already completed.

> This problem gets even more complicated when we consider situations where either the sender or the recipient of funds does not have a bank account. What if a payment has to take place between a bank and a mobile money provider? Now the application would have to also integrate with the mobile money provider. Custom integration becomes an expansive problem.

Reviewer 2: ![custom](https://github.com/interledger/interledger.org-developers/assets/1461498/85f7a1e2-afc4-4db2-9785-1c7e1206fed9)

Reviewer 3: I think "receiving bank" can be removed here, given the paragraph talks about moving money between a sending bank _directly to_ a mobile money provider

Author: @mkurapov my idea here was that the fundraising app did a direct integration with their bank (where they'd like to receive funds). Now the sender has a bank, that's fine because bank A can probably talk to bank B. But if the sender has a mobile money account or digital wallet we may have issues.

Reviewer 3: @JoblersTune makes sense, in that case, maybe we can just rename from "receiving" to "merchant" bank maybe (or "fundraisers" bank), and then "customer" bank? To remove any confusion from sending/receiving

> What if there was a way for an application to access your account directly? Currently, even if you provide an application with your account details, it likely wouldn't be able to do much with them, even with your permission. As an account owner, shouldn't you have the power to decide who can access your account and what they can do with it?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
What if there was a way for an application to access your account directly, and securely? Currently, even if you provide an application with your account details, it likely wouldn't be able to do much with them, even with your permission. As an account owner, shouldn't you have the power to decide who can access your account and what they can do with it?
```

Reviewer 4: One thing that stood out to me in this first part is that who "you" are switches between what I'll call the app developer ("Whether you're running an eCommerce site...") and the end-user/customer/payer ("...application to access your account directly?"). Who is your intended audience for this post?

Author: The intended audience is the account owner, since this is meant as a less technical introduction. Let me do a read through and track down all those bad references. I wrote it the other way first and then changed it over.

## The Promise of the Open Payments Standard

> Open Payments aims to change that by enabling applications to access users' accounts directly without needing multiple custom integrations. Standardization is key to eliminating these custom integrations. With a single integration point, applications can access any account that implements the standard, whether it's a bank account, a digital wallet, or a mobile money account. The only requirement is that both the sender's and recipient's account providers support the Open Payments standard.

Reviewer 4: I like account provider more than account servicing entity.

Reviewer 2: ![opp](https://github.com/interledger/interledger.org-developers/assets/1461498/864bc09d-3aa2-4b79-b765-38cf7010d434)

Author: @huijing Not just everyone talking to each other directly (that's more ILP), more the application can talk to everyone directly.

As an open standard, Open Payments is free for anyone to use, ensuring seamless communication between applications and their user’s account providers, regardless of which financial institutions are involved. This direct communication means you're not incurring additional fees or delays.

The Open Payments protocol also aims to make transactions more transparent. Before committing to a payment, you understand how much the recipient is receiving and how much this payment costs you in transaction fees.

The Open Payments standard addresses key questions such as:

- Where should the money be sent, exactly? It provides a standardized way to identify and locate user accounts across different financial institutions.

> - Ensuring all parties agree on the final amount after any fees are added to a transaction.

Reviewer 4: This isn't a question :)

> - Determining the best underlying method to use for the transaction.

Reviewer 4: Also not a question

> With the Open Payments standard, applications do not need to be registered financial service providers (FSPs) to facilitate transactions. Instead of moving or holding money, applications send payment obligations. This means they are not transferring money directly but are sending instructions to your financial institution to transfer the funds on your behalf. This setup eliminates the need for the application to be a financial service provider itself, even though it has direct communication access to your account. This is beneficial for applications because they don’t need to contend with the legal and compliance hurdles required to be a financial services provider. But it’s also advantageous for you because you don't need to share sensitive information with online applications. Applications storing information like credit card numbers and CVV codes always pose a risk of data leaks or hacking, even with the best intentions.

Reviewer 3: "But it’s also advantageous for you because you don't need to share sensitive information with online applications"

This is just a thought I had (especially knowing the banking context in Canada/North America), but we could also mention that without any API standards, some third-party apps like budget trackers rely on web-scraping to actually connect your bank accounts, meaning they end up knowing your banking login details too.

You might think, this sounds convenient, but is it secure? I don’t want just anyone pulling money out of my account!

## You Remain in Control

With the Open Payments standard, you remain in full control of your financial transactions. When an application uses Open Payments, it securely shares key information about itself with the financial institutions it interacts with. This verification ensures that the account provider knows the application is legitimate when making a payment request on your behalf.

> Importantly, any withdrawal of money from your account requires your explicit consent. When you grant an application access to your account, you are not giving it unrestricted access. Instead, you specify the access rights: the exact amount, the time frame, and whether it can access your balance or move funds. Open Payments also supports recurring payments, allowing you to define how often, for how long, and up to what amount an application can access your account. This granular control ensures that you are always aware of and consenting to the transactions made from your account.

Reviewer 3: > Instead, you specify the access rights: the exact amount, the time frame, and whether it can access your balance or move funds.

Maybe instead of you "specifying" the access rights, maybe using "control" is better, since the app/merchant would still be the one specifying amounts in the grant, for example. 

Also, instead of "access your balance", we could say access to your transaction history? Since balance isn't something we could know in Open Payments

Reviewer 4: FWIW I like both of these suggestions

## There Are Some Catches

For this system to work, both the sender and the recipient must have Open Payments-enabled accounts. This requirement poses an adoption hurdle, which the Interledger Foundation is actively addressing. We are dedicated to making adoption as seamless as possible for financial service providers (FSPs) and applications by providing extensive support and resources.

It's important to note that integrating Open Payments does not guarantee a shared settlement layer. A settlement layer in a payment system refers to the infrastructure and processes used to actually transfer the funds between parties to finalize transactions. This includes the mechanisms that ensure that money moves from the sender to the recipient and that all parties' accounts are accurately updated. It is the actual movement of your money out of your account and into someone else's. Open Payments is designed to enable different payment systems to communicate and transact with each other. However, at the end of the day, those systems also need to be connected in such a way that they can settle the movement of funds between accounts as well.

> The Interledger Protocol is designed to enable financial institutions to find common settlement paths through the interconnected network of account providers. But for this article, think of Open Payments as an application sending payment obligations to an account provider, Interledger as finding the best route through a network of payment providers to actually settle those accounts, and sending instructions on how to do this to the account provider. Settlement happens within the existing settlement infrastructure that already connects many financial institutions to each other today. So with Open Payments, it is still possible that a shared settlement layer cannot be found, causing those payments to fail. However, with widespread adoption of Interledger and Open Payments, many of the settlement layer issues will be resolved within the existing settlement networks. And those that aren't will more easily be able to add themselves to the network and become fully interconnected.

Reviewer 2: We should talk about this (not in this article but on a broader level, related to going through the specification language and clearing up inconsistencies). Sorry for hijacking your article, Sarah 😅

- Is there anyone in the wild using OP now?

Currently, the adoption of the Open Payments standard is still in progress. Some innovative institutions and services have begun to integrate this standard, but widespread use is still developing.

In South Africa, for instance, Fynbos Wallet is an example of a provider working with the Open Payments standard. However, its interactions are still primarily limited to other users within the same country due to regulatory and technical constraints.

For most people, accessing an Open Payments-enabled account depends on their financial institutions adopting the standard. As more banks, digital wallets, and mobile money providers incorporate Open Payments, the benefits will become more widely accessible.

## What Are the Possibilities for Tomorrow?

A world with direct access to accounts through the Open Payments standard fosters innovation and inclusion by reducing barriers to entry for developers, who can create direct payment solutions more quickly and at a lower cost without the need for custom integrations. This democratization of development enables smaller companies and startups to compete and innovate.

> Users are empowered to give clients direct access to their accounts. They can give access to who they want, to do what they want within set limits. Users also benefit from seamless transactions, transparency with regards to what fees they incur, and enhanced control over their financial data, improving trust and security. Financial inclusion is significantly increased by enabling access for those without traditional bank accounts, as well as cutting down on the costs of making payments which is achieved by reducing the development effort required in integrating with other account providers and cutting out unnecessary intermediaries thus removing any additional fees.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Users are empowered to give clients direct access to their accounts. They can give access to who they want, to do what they want within set limits. Users also benefit from seamless transactions, transparency with regards to what fees they incur, and enhanced control over their financial data, improving trust and security. Financial inclusion is significantly increased by enabling access for those without traditional bank accounts, as well as cutting down on the costs of making payments by removing unnecessary intermediaries, and reducing the development effort of payment integrations.
```

## There Are Some Catches

For this system to work, both the sender and the recipient must have Open Payments-enabled accounts. This requirement poses an adoption hurdle, which the Interledger Foundation is actively addressing. We are dedicated to making adoption as seamless as possible for financial service providers (FSPs) and applications by providing extensive support and resources.

It's important to note that integrating Open Payments does not guarantee a shared settlement layer. A settlement layer in a payment system refers to the infrastructure and processes used to actually transfer the funds between parties to finalize transactions. This includes the mechanisms that ensure that money moves from the sender to the recipient and that all parties' accounts are accurately updated. It is the actual movement of your money out of your account and into someone else's. Open Payments is designed to enable different payment systems to communicate and transact with each other. However, at the end of the day, those systems also need to be connected in such a way that they can settle the movement of funds between accounts as well. 

> Many financial institutions already have established pathways and processes for moving money between accounts. Interledger automates and optimizes how these institutions navigate this network. If you think of Open Payments as an application sending payment obligations directly to the relevant account provider, then Interledger is about finding the best route through that exisiting network that allows funds to be transferred and payments to be completed. While Open Payments simplifies the initiation of payments, it doesn't guarantee that a route for completing those payments will always be found, potentially leading to failed transactions. However, as adoption of the standard grows, more people will gain access to an expanding and interconnected payments network, reducing the likelihood of payment failures.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many financial institutions already have established pathways and processes for moving money between accounts. Interledger automates and optimizes how these institutions navigate this network. If you think of Open Payments as  a way of sending payment obligations directly to the relevant account provider, then Interledger is about finding the best route through that exisiting network that allows funds to be transferred and payments to be completed. While Open Payments simplifies the initiation of payments, it doesn't guarantee that a route for completing those payments will always be found, potentially leading to failed transactions. However, as adoption of the standard grows, more people will gain access to an expanding and interconnected payments network, reducing the likelihood of payment failures.
```
